#cisco

# NAT benefits:

* NAT conserves the legally registered addressing scheme by allowing the privatization of intranets.
* NAT conserves addresses through application port-level multiplexing.
* NAT increases the flexibility of connections to the public network.
* NAT provides consistency for internal network addressing schemes.
* NAT allows the existing private IPv4 address scheme to remain while allowing for easy change to a new public addressing scheme.
* NAT hides the IPv4 addresses of users and other devices.
# NAT disadvantages

* NAT increases forwarding delays.
* End-to-end addressing is lost.
* End-to-end IPv4 traceability is lost.
* NAT complicates the use of tunneling protocols, such as IPsec.
* Services that require the initiation of TCP connections from the outside network, or stateless protocols, such as those using UDP, can be disrupted.
# NAT addresses terminology

#### Inside local address:
>The address of the source as seen from inside the network. This is typically a private IPv4 address. The inside local address of PC1 is 192.168.10.10.
#### Inside global addresses
>The address of source as seen from the outside network. The inside global address is mostly the internet facing interface.
#### Outside global address
>The address of the destination as seen from the outside network. The outside global address of the web server is 209.165.201.1
#### Outside local address
>The address of the destination as seen from the inside network. PC1 sends traffic to the web server at the IPv4 address 209.165.201.1. While uncommon, this address could be different than the globally routable address of the destination.

# Static NAT
>- Is a 1 to 1 translation
>- One private to one public IP

# Dynamic NAT (also known as pooled NAT)
> - uses a pool of inside global addresses (=>Public internet addres)
> - first come first served based

>[!attention] Dynamic NAT requires that enough public addresses are available to satisfy the total number of simultaneous user sessions.

>[!info] Can be combined with PAT

# PAT - port address translation

if the same port is used by the inside local address with a request = port number + 1
### ICMP requests
>Because icmp is not a udp or tcp protocol it cannot use port numbers. Therefor it uses the query-id of the icmp packet instead of port number.

>Some packets do not contain a Layer 4 port number, such as ICMPv4 messages. Each of these types of protocols is handled differently by PAT.

>For example, ICMPv4 query messages, echo requests, and echo replies include a Query ID. ICMPv4 uses the Query ID to identify an echo request with its corresponding echo reply.

### PAT mechanism:
>1. Attempts to preserve the original source port.
>2. If the original source port is already used, PAT assigns the first available port number starting from the beginning of the appropriate port group 0-511, 512-1,023, or 1,024-65,535.
>3. When there are no more ports available and there is more than one external address in the address pool, PAT moves to the next address to try to allocate the original source port.
>4. The process continues until there are no more available ports or external IPv4 addresses in the address pool.
# NAT64

* IPv6 was developed with the intention of making NAT for IPv4 with translation between public and private IPv4 addresses unnecessary.
* However, IPv6 does include its own IPv6 private address space, unique local addresses (ULAs).
* IPv6 unique local addresses (ULA) are similar to RFC 1918 private addresses in IPv4 but have a different purpose.
* ULA addresses are meant for only local communications within a site. ULA addresses are not meant to provide additional IPv6 address space, nor to provide a level of security.
* IPv6 does provide for protocol translation between IPv4 and IPv6 known as NAT64.
# NAT configuration

## Configure Static NAT

1. Create a mapping between the inside local address and the inside global addresses using the ip nat inside source static command.
```
R2(config)#ip nat inside source static 192.168.10.254 209.165.201.5
```

2. The interfaces participating in the translation are configured as inside or outside relative to NAT with the ip nat inside and ip nat outside commands.
```
!-- on the inside interface --!
R2(conf-if)#ip nat inside
!
!-- on the outside facing interface--!
R2(conf-if)#ip nat outside
```

### showing static nat translations

```
R2# show ip nat translations
Pro  Inside global       Inside local        Outside local       Outside global

tcp  209.165.201.5       192.168.10.254      209.165.200.254     209.165.200.254
---  209.165.201.5       192.168.10.254        ---                  ---
Total number of translations: 2 
```

* This command shows active NAT translations.
* Because the example is a static NAT configuration, the translation is ==always present in the NAT table regardless of any active communications.==
* If the command is issued during an active session, the output also indicates the address of the outside device.


Total number of translations: 2
## Configure Dynamic NAT

1. Define the pool of addresses that will be used for translation using the ip nat pool command.
2. Configure a standard ACL to identify (permit) only those addresses that are to be translated.
3. Bind the ACL to the pool, using the ip nat inside source list command.
4. Assign the inside to an interface
5. Assign the outside to an interface


```
R2(config)# ip nat pool NAT-POOL1 209.165.200.226 209.165.200.240 netmask 255.255.255.224

R2(config)# access-list 1 permit 192.168.0.0 0.0.255.255

R2(config)# ip nat inside source list 1 pool NAT-POOL1

R2(config)# interface serial 0/1/0
R2(config-if)# ip nat inside

R2(config-if)# interface serial 0/1/1
R2(config-if)# ip nat outside
```
## Configure PAT without address pool

To configure PAT to use a single IPv4 address, add the keyword overload to the ip nat inside source command
```
R2(config)# ip nat inside source list 1 interface serial 0/1/1 overload

R2(config)# access-list 1 permit 192.168.0.0 0.0.255.255

R2(config)# interface serial0/1/0
R2(config-if)# ip nat inside

R2(config)# interface Serial0/1/1
R2(config-if)# ip nat outside
```
## Configure PAT with address pool

```
R2(config)# ip nat pool NAT-POOL2 209.165.200.226 209.165.200.240 netmask 255.255.255.224

R2(config)# access-list 1 permit 192.168.0.0 0.0.255.255

R2(config)# ip nat inside source list 1 pool NAT-POOL2 overload

R2(config)# interface serial0/1/0
R2(config-if)# ip nat inside

R2(config-if)# interface serial0/1/0
R2(config-if)# ip nat outside
```
# showing nat commands

```
R2#show ip nat translations

R2#show ip nat statistics
```